Compute
EC2 “Elastic Compute Cloud” - they are VM machines inside club platforms . There can be physical machines too
EC2 container service - run and manage docker container at scale
Elastic bean stock - developers who don’t understand AWS and just upload their code . Then Elastic bean stock will go through and provision , load balance EC2 instances so that developer just consentrates on code.
Lambda - Lambda is a code that we can upload to cloud after which we can control and it executes. we don’t need to worry about VMs and underlying services. all we need to worry about is code. 
Lightsail - is amazon’s Virtual private service service. This is designed to provision users with server it will give you with fixed ip address and RDC access for windows and consoles to manage service . it is a watered down version of EC2. 
Batch - used to do batch computing.

Storage
S3 “Simple Storage Service” - Upload files to buckets in cloud. One of old service
EFS “Elastic File system“ - Network attached storage so we can store go and store files in an EFS volume and mount that to multiple VM’s 
Glacier - Data archival 
Snowball - Used to bring in large amount of data to AWS data center instead of transferring through wifi as physically transferring data is fast in this case due to huge volume of data.
Storage Gateway - Virtual appliances that are installed in DC that will replicate data back to S3. 

Database
RDS “Relational Database Service” - mysql , postgress sql, aurora, oracle etc basically any relational DB will sit inside it.
Dynamo DB - Used for non relational data bases
Elasticache - Is a way of caching commonly  used sql query. so db will be free to perform other query.
Red Shift - is for data warehousing or BI where we will be doin complex queries. 

Migration
AWS Migration Hub - Tracking service to track app as you migrate to AWS services and also integrates to others serves in framework.
Application Discovery service - Automated set of tool to detect what apps we have and the dependency it needs.
Database Migration service - Helps to migrate DB from on premise to AWS.
Server Migration Service - Helps to migrate VM and physical servers to AWS cloud.
Snowball - used to migrate lager amount of data to Cloud we are speaking in tera bytes.

Networking & content Delivery
VPC “Virtual Private Cloud: - Virtual Data center. We go in and configure Availability zone, network address ranges , route tables , network ACLs etc.
Cloud Front - Cloud Front is Amazon’s Content delivery network . it  stores media files like video files or image files in location closer edge locations of users instead of users accessing them from a long distance locations.
route53 - is amazons DNS service 
API Gateway - is way of creating own API for other services to talk to.
Direct connect - Dedicated line from corp head office or Data center to Amazons and it will directly connect into your VPC.

Developer Tools
CodeStar - is way of getting group of developers to work together easily. setup code , continuous delivery tool chain etc.
Code commit - source control service
Code build - will compile code and run tests against it and then will produce software packages ready to deploy
Code deploy - Automates application deployment to EC2 instances as well deployment to on premise instances as well to lambda instances as well.
code pipeline - continuous delivery service to model and visualize and automate setps to release software
Xray - to debug and analyze server less applications , it has request tracing to find root causes to issues and address perfomance issues.
Cloud9 - IDE environment to Develop code inside AWS console (in web browser).

Management 
CloudWatch - Monitoring service. sysopsops use it extensively
CloudFormation - It's a way of scripting infrastructure. Solutions Architects used it extensively.
CloudTrail - any changes or we are doing something in cloud then we trigger API in cloud env then cloud trail will capture it. 
Config - Monitors the configuration of entire AWS environemnt.
OpsWorks - Similar to Elastic Beans but a lot more robus . Its  way of automating environemts so all the configuration of environemts are there. 
Service Catalog - a way of managing a catalog of IT services like databases , VMs, OS, inducidual systems etc.
Systems Manager - Interface to manage AWS resources typpicallysed used by EC2 instances. 
Trusted Advisor - would give advice about security , how to save money , wil tell you if we leave any port open, tell if we havent used more AWS servies. Basically like a secretary.
Managed Services - Amazon affers Managed services for thier own AWScloud so we not need to wory about EC2 instances or scaling.

Media Services
Elastic Transcoder - Takes the video files makes it look good across platorms.
Media convert - File based video transcoding service with broadcast video features. allows to create video on demand content for  broadcast and stream across multiple screens.
Media Live -   Creates high quality video streams to braodcast to internet connected devices 
Media Package - Prepares and protects videos for delivery over internet.
Media Store - great place to Store media. gives good perfomance lowers latency.
Media Traior - Allows to do targetted advertising without compromising on bradcast level quality of service

Machine Learning
Sage Maker - Makes Easy for developers to use deep learning when coding for environemnt.
Comprehend - Does sentiment analysis around data of your product.
DeepLens - Artificially aware camera. Camera itself can recognise whats infront of it. It's a physical piece of harware.
Lex - It powers the Amazon Alexa service . Lex is a way of communicating with cusotmers.
Machine Learning - Through a dataset into AWS cloud and it will analysis and give an outcome. like amazon's suggested item while ahopping.
Polly - Takes text and turns it into speach.
Rekognition - it tell whats in the file. it will recognise and tell what is in the picture with percentage acuracy. 
Amazon Translate - Translate languages.
Amazon Transcribe - Automatic speach recognition. Speach to Text

Analytics
Athena - Allows to run SQL query against things in your S3 bucket. completely Serverless no infrastructure to manage.
EMR - Used for Processing large amount of data ( big data solutions)
cloud Search - search services for AWS
elastic Search services  - search services for AWS
Kinesis - is way of ingesting large amount of data into AWS like social media feeds 
Kinesis Vide Streams - ingest large amount of video data into AWS
QuickSight - Business Intelegince tool 
Data Pipeline - is a way of moving data between different AWS services.
Glue - used to Extract, Transform and Load large amount of data 

Security & Identity and Compliance 
IAM "Identity Access Management" 
Cognito - Device Authentication
GuardDuty - Monitors AWS account for Malicious attach.
Inspector - is an agent that need to install in VM's or EC2 instances and a tests can be run on them like does my EC2 instances have security vulnarabilites and Inspector will give you a report.
Macie - Will scan S3 buckets for Personally identifiable information (PII) and send alert 
Certificate Manager - is used to manage SSL certificate.
CloudHSM "Hardware Security Module" - dedicated piece of harware to store private/public keys. 
Directory Services - Way of integrating MS active directory services with AWS services.
WAF "Web Applicaiton firewall" - its like a firewall layer whch stops things like cross site scirpting , sql injection so it monitors application level and sees if user is acting malicious if it needs to intervene to prevent any attack.
Shield - Shield is used to prevent DDOS attack. 
Artifact - this tool is good for audit and compliance . its a portal to download on demand AWS compliance report. Basically download and understand amazon documentation.

Mobile Services 
mobile Hub - Management console . We can create mobile hub and it basically setup AWS services for you and generates cloud configuration file then we can use AWS clud SDK  to connec to AWS backend.
Pinpoint - targetted push notification to drive customer engagement. 
AWS App Sync - Automatically updates data in web and mobile in real time and also updates data for offline users once they connect back.
DeviceFarm - is a way of testing apps in real live devices so this could be iphone or android etc. 
Mobile analytics - is analystics for mobile devices 

AR/VR code name Sumerian
common set of tools used to create AR/VR 

Application Integration 
Step Functions - this is way of managing lambda funtionas and diffrent functions/steps to go through it.
amazon MQ - Amazons version of using MQs
SNS - Simple Notification Service 
SQS - simple Queue SErvice . Decoupling your infrastructure 
SWF - simple workflow service . 

Customer Engagement 
Connect - contact center as a service i.e like a contact center in cloud .
Simple Email Service - Amazon's email service 

Business Productivity
Alexa For business - WE can use alexa for doing whole bunch of things with respect to business like joining a meeting , reporting a broken printer to IT etc .
Chime - video conferencing 
Work docs - like a drop box for AWS.
WorkMail - this is amazons was of microsoft ofice 365

Desktop and app streaming 
Workspaces - is a VDI solution
App Steam 2.0 - is a way of streaming applications . App is running in cloud but gets streamed in your device [ like citrix does]

IOT 
iOT "Internet of things" - electronic devices can send in informations like sensor temerature or videos or audios etc.
iOT Device Management - electronic devices can send in data/inputs and managing at large scale can be difficult and that where IOT device management comes in and it can be managed it.
Amazon FreeRTOS - operating system for micro controllers. 
Greengrass - is a software that lets you run  local compute messaging , data caching , sync and machine learning capabilites for connected devices in a secure way.

Game Development
GameLift - service to help develop games. This can be Vr games as well and can be hosted in cloud.



IAM - Identity Access Management 
Manage users and theor level of access to the AWS console.
Gives you :
Centralised control of your AWS account 
Shared access to your AWS account 
Granular Permission 
Identity Federation
Multifactor Authentication 
Temp access for users/devices and services where necessary
set up own password rotation policy
Integrates with many different AWS services
Supports PCI DSS compliance 
Important terminology :
User
Group
Roles
Permission


Simple Token Service 
Grant users simple and temporary access to AWS resources.Users can come form 3 sources 
1. Federation (typically active Directory) - uses SAML “security assertion Markup Language” . Grants temp access based off users AD credentials. Does not need to be user in IAM. SSO allows users to sign on to AWS without assignign IAM credentials.
2. Federation with Mobile apps - uses Google/Amazon/FB other open ID providers to log i 
3. Cross Account access - users form one AWS account access resources of other account.

Key Terms in STS 
Federation - Combining or joining a list of users in one domain (such as IAM) with a list of users in another domain (AD, FB etc)
Identity Broker - a service that allows you to take identity from point a and join it(federate it ) to point b 
Identity store - Services like AD, FB etc
Identities - user of a service like FB etc






