AWS Cloud watch

cloudwatch METRICS 
will provide metrics for all aws services. 
metric is variable to monitor (cpu utilization, networking bandwidth etc), has timestamps.
metrics belong to namespace
dimention is an attribute of a metric (eg: instance id , env etc)
upto 10 dimentions per metric 
with help of metrics you can create cloud watch dashboards.

DETAILED MONITORING
Ec2 instances have metris every 5 mins . if DETAILED MONITORING (extra cost) is enabled then can get data every 1 mins.
Detailed monitoring is used while scalling ec2 using ASG.
EC2 memory used not pushed by default( must be pushed from iside the instance as custom metric)

Cloudwatch CUSTOM METRICS
can define and send your own metrics. (memory, RAM usage, logged in user etc)
use dimention to segment metrics.
API to send  metrics : PUTMetricsData
metrics resolution (StorageResolution API parmaeter - 2 options)- standard (60 sec), high resolution (1/5/10/30seconds - high cost)
Accept data point 2 weeks in the past and 2 hours in the future.

cloud watch DASHBOARD
dashboards is setup to access key metrics and alarms. Dashboards are global. can include graphs from different aws accounts across regions.
can setup auto refresh (10s, 1m, 2m, 5m,15m)
dashboard can be shared with people who dont have an AWS  account(through cognito).
3 dashboards are free after whcih $3 per dashboard.

Cloudwatch LOGS
log groups - arbitary name usually representing an application.
log stream - instances within application / log files / containers.
log expiration plicy can be defined (30 days, never expire etc).

logs can be sent to - amazon S3 (exports), kinesis data streams, firehose, lambda, elastic search.
log source - sdk, log agent, cloud watch unified agent. 
            elastic bean stalk sends collection of logs from application.
            ecs: collection from container
            lambda: collection from function logs.
            VPC flow log: vpc pecific logs.
            API Gateway
            cloud trail based on filter
            route53: log DNS queries

log metric filter & insights
logs can use filter expression, find a specific IP inside a logs or match text 'ERROR' and these filters then can be used to trigger cloud watch alarms.
cloud watch insights can be used to query logs and add queris to dashboard.

S3 Export - log data can take up to 12 hours to be avaialble for export. the api call is createExportTask. not near real time or real time. alternative is log subscription instead.
log subscriptions filter- subscriptinos are a filter we applu on cloud watch logs and then we send them to respective destinations like lambda, kinesis firehose ( from firehose we can sent to s3 (near real time)), streams, and then from streams we cna send to ecs2 , lambda, KDF, KDA  
using subscription filter, cross region log aggregation is also possible. multi account & muti regions logs can be aggregated.

cloudwatch log agent vs unified agent
need to isntall cloud watch log agent to get logs from ec2 pushed to cloudwatch. log agent can be setup on both cloud and onpremise instances. IAM permission will be needed.
log agent - old version of agent . can only send limited metrics to cloud watch logs.
unified agent - granular metrics can be sent. system-level metrics such as RAM,processes etc can be sent. Centralisedconfiguration using SSMparameter store.
                collected directly on the instance and pushed to cloudwatch. metics like CPU, disk metrics, RAM,netstat, processes, swap space etc can be monitored.

cloudwatch ALARMS
can trigger alarms when an instance starts, stop or terminates, autoscalling is triggered etc can send a notification to sns.
status check - instance status (cehck EC2 VMs), system status (cehck the underlying hardware)
alarms can be created based on cloud watch log metrics filter.

Cloudwatch EVENTS
event pattern - intercepts events from aws Services
schedule or cron - create an event every 4 hours
A JSON payload is created from the event and passed on to the target.

Amazon EVENTBRIDGE
EventBridge is replacing of cloudwatch events.
Default event bus - generated by amazon services
Partner event bus - receives events from SAAS service(data dog, zendesk etc)
custom event bus - for your own apps
event buses can be accessed by other aws accounts. This helps in aggregating events from multiple account into one account.
can Archieve events sent to event bus for specific or indefinite time period. Can replay archieved events.
Can create rules that defines how events are processed.
schema registry - event bus can analyze events in eventbus againt schema. schema registry allows to generate code in advance for the app to know how the event structure will look. schema can be versioned.
resource based policy per event bus. this helps in allow or deny events from another aws accounts or regions. 

Cloud TRAIL
Provides governance, complainance and audit trail for aws account. it is enabled by default.
keeps an history of vents/ api calls made within your AWS account by : console , sdk, cli or aws services.
can put logs from cloud trail into cloud watch S3 export. 
a trail can be applied to all region or single region.
if a resource is deleted then cloud trail helps in investigation.
Mangement events - any management related events performed on aws resources. like IAM policy update, creation of subnet, deleting an instance , setting up logging etc.
                   by default cloud trail is configured to log management events. can filter read events from write events.
data events - data events are not logged by default due to high volume. eg: S3 read and write object events (getObject, deleteObject, PutObject). AWS Lambda function execution activity (InvokeAPI).
trail insights - cloudinsights is enabled to detect unusual activity in account (like inaccurage resource provisioning, hitting service limits, bursts of iama action, gaps in periodic maintanance )
                 normal management events are analyzed to create baseline. and then continuously analyze write events to detect unusual patterns.
                 events are stored for 90 days in cloud trail. to store beyond that export it to S3 and use athena to query logs.

AWS CONFIG
Helps with auditing and complaince of AWS resources.
It helps in recording configuration changes over time. 
(like is there an unrestricted SSH access to my security group and then it happened, do my bucets have public access, )
Can send alerts through sns notifications.
it is a per region service. Can be aggregated across regions and accounts.

config rules
can use aws managed config rules or can create custom rules (evaluate if Ec2 instance is t2.micro)
rules then can be evaluated and triggered. 
evaluation can be triggered for each config change nd/or on regualr intervals.
aws config rule does not revent actions from happening (no deny)
you can view configuration, complainance and cloudTrail API call of resources over time in a timeline.

Remediation
automate Remediation of non complaiant resources using SSM automation document.
Can use aws managed automation document or custom automation document (like custom automation document that invoke lambda)
you can set remediation retires if the resources is still non complaint after auto remediation.

notification
we can use aws event bridge to trigger events when aws resources are non complaint.
can sent configuration changes and complaince state notification to SNS (all events use sns filtering or filtering at client side)